Bachelor Thesis Abstract

Sometimes, while reading, our minds drift to thoughts unrelated to the text. Mind wandering (MW) has often been studied through emotion induction before an experiment, frequently associating it with negative moods. To expand on this research, the current study investigates mindless reading—where the eyes move across the page but the mind is disengaged—by manipulating the emotional valence of the text itself. Participants read literary short stories transitioning from neutral to negative and from neutral to positive tones. The experiment combined thought probes and eye-tracking techniques to explore the frequencies and types of off-task thoughts readers experience. The findings suggest a strong influence of negative textual valence on MW. People’s minds wandered the least when reading a text written in a negative tone, with over half of these instances triggered by personal connections made with the text. In line with existing literature, reading comprehension was negatively correlated with MW. While eye movements were not predicted by MW, they closely resembled those observed in studies examining gaze patterns in response to emotional stimuli. Fixation durations were significantly shorter during reading emotional sections of the text, indicating that these conditions speed up the reading process. No evidence was found for a varying number of fixations across neutral and emotional textual valences.

The Rcode folder contains code for statistical analyses. Specifically, Generalized Linear Mixed Models, Restricted Maximum Likelihood Estimation Models and t-tests were employed to analyse MW and PC rates and eye movements.

The Python code zip file contains code for preprocessing raw BeGaze files into csv, alongside some descriptive statistics.
